# Lennon-McCartney

If you write a bunch of stories or poems, maybe one day you will become so famous for your work that there will be people who study your writing. There might be some who try and understand the meaning of what you have written and also some who might try and study the way you write. Maybe as they spend several sleepless nights analysing every piece of work you’ve written, they will reach a point where if you dropped an anonymous letter to them, they would still know you wrote it. While this sounds mildly creepy, and makes you hope that your current hobby of writing doesn’t make you a celebrity, you cant help but wonder what you replicate in every piece of writing that still makes it traceable to you. 
Every person’s natural writing style is like a fingerprint - it is unique and almost impossible to replicate entirely. So why should we care? The generic form of study of style has also been applied to music and paintings as well. This helps attribute anonymous pieces of work to a creator. For instance, in 2015, researchers used various stylometric techniques to identify a play, Double Falsehood, to be Shakespeare’s work.
This can also be used to identify which parts of a joint composition were composed by which individuals. James Joyce’s Ulysses, was determined through stylometric analysis, to be composed by five different people. 
Stylometry is also employed in plagiarism checks to determine if someone actually produced a piece of work that they claim to have produced.
One particular paper that inspired me to write about stylometry for authorship attribution was Data in the Life: Authorship Attribution in Lennon-McCartney Songs. John Lennon and Paul McCartney did almost all the writing work for the Beatles. They decided that all songs would be jointly credited to Lennon-McCartney even if only one of them had actually composed it. This meant that no one knew which of them actually wrote the songs, until the Beatles broke up, and they started revealing it in interviews. Often their recollections were not consistent, and resulted in both of them claiming complete authorship for some songs and this still remains disputed till date. However, stylometry enthusiasts have long attempted to determine through different analysis techniques to see whose style the compositions resembled. 
In the recent past, machine learning has been used extensively in stylometric analysis due to its ability to extract and analyse hidden features and patterns in a set of numbers that can represent textual data, image features, or musical notes. 
In this paper in particular, the authors have made use of musical features from each song or song portion consisting of the occurrence of melodic notes, chords, melodic note pairs, chord change pairs, and four-note melody contours. 
This inspired me to take a look at the words in the lyrics themselves, and to make things simpler, just their word lengths. For example, Shakespeare is known to have used a lot more words of length four than three, which is the opposite trend seen in several others of his time. 
A method that uses these word lengths at face value and is known to work as a naive approach is Mendenhall’s characteristic curves of composition. These curves are a plot of the frequency distribution of word lengths. 

This isn’t a great method because a lot of times an author’s own characteristic curve may not agree with itself, and sometimes someone else’s work may agree more with your curve than you do. But it could still work to a certain extent if you have significantly dissimilar writing styles.  

I decided to plot the characteristic curves for the lyrics of a few undisputed songs of John Lennon against those of Paul McCartney. Words of length 3,4 and 5 are used in similar patterns, which leaves us with medium to long lengths.

It is still difficult to attribute disputed songs such as ‘In my Life’ to one of them just from these curves. 
But machine learning techniques for text classification are suited just for such situations where humans cannot effectively determine the patterns that make up the data at hand. A typical approach to authorship attribution through text classification is to obtain the dataset, extract stylometric features, and then apply classification algorithms to it. I followed a similar procedure. I collected song lyrics as my dataset. I performed some basic preprocessing tasks as well, to remove things like numbers, punctuation, and special characters. I then expanded all the contractions such as didn’t to did not. Next, I decided to remove stop words as they make up the majority of 3,4,5 length words that seem to follow similar patterns in both John Lennon and Paul McCartney’s songs, and might not be of much use.  With the remaining words, I used their word length frequencies as stylometric features of each song. But the problem with using just the word lengths was that the length of songs were not the same. Some songs were barely four lines each and some had multiple verses. This made it necessary to normalise the frequency by dividing by the total number of words that are being taken into consideration for that song. This becomes the input vector for the classification algorithm.
I also used LIME to interpret my results. To read about my love for LIME and how it works, read my [blog post](https://web-crawler-blog.herokuapp.com/post/3/). 
Using the lime tabular explainer, I was able to see that the ones classified as John Lennon in the testing set were very close. The ones classified as Paul McCartney were classified with higher certainty. This makes it pretty evident that if it had mostly long words it was definitely John Lennon, but if it had a mix of both short and long, it was harder to predict. 

This is an extremely naive approach that isn't guaranteed to work for any set of given artistic styles. However, it is still a start if you know that the styles in consideration are pretty different.
If you want to check out the code I used, you can find it here. This has mostly been a stroke of luck and might not mean anything, since the dataset size is pretty small. Nevertheless it was fun. 
